=News - 4 Aug 2009==

The 0.5 packages have been released.

=Description=

A system for monitoring the [http://www.nws.noaa.gov/noaaport/html/noaaport.shtml Noaaport] signal level and quality, as well as the performance characteristics of the receiver hardware and [http://www.noaaport.net processing systems] of the receiving stations.

=Overview=

Although Npstats' main purpose is to monitor the noaaport receivers and servers it can actually be used to monitor any kind of device that can transmit data to a computer. Npstats can monitor devices that are local to a site as well as devices in remote sites. In the latter role, Npstats acts as a central monitoring server to which clients can connect to compare the status of the noaaport signal in widely separated geographical areas.

Npstats consists of a daemon _npstatsd_, which is responsible for running a data collector _manager_ and a _qrunner_. The _manager_, at certain periods, execute a set of device _pollers_ that retrieve the status data from the local devices that are being monitored.
In addition, data from remote devices can be received by ftp, http or sftp. The data is accumulated in a spool directory until the npstatsd daemon is executed the _qrunner_, and then the data is archived locally or remotely, or both, depending on the configuration. The data can be archived in plain text files and/or in a database such as Postgres or Mysql.

In short, Npstats can be configured to be used only as a local device monitor, as a centralized server, or both. Npstats comes with its own (tclhttpd-based) web server for monitoring Npstats itself. 


=Installation=

The following packages are required:

  * tcl
  * tcllib  (e.g., tcllib-1.10-1.fc8.noarch.rpm)
  * gnuplot

Then for FreeBSD, Debian and CentOS,

  * pkg_add npstats-`<version>`.tbz
  * dpkg -i npstats-`<version>`.deb
  * rpm -i npstats-`<version>`.rpm

The packages are available from the software section of the [http://www.noaaport.net noaaport.net] site. Download the appropriate npstats package from the software section.

From the same site, download the appropriate version of the novrapoll program and install it as

    /usr/local/libexec/npstats/pollers/novrapoll,

making sure that it is executable. 

=Quick Start Configuration Guide=

==Device list==

The default configuration has an entry for a novra box, in the file

        defaults/devices.conf

To override that entry and insert your own, create the file

        site/devices.conf

with the following lines

{{{
set devices(devicelist) [list];
set devices(alertlist) [list];
}}}

This will ensure that the default device is deleted.

To monitor your own novra device, add an entry like this,

{{{
lappend devices(devicelist) {
    _devicename_
    novra_s75
    _devicenumber_
    {export 0 csvarchive 1 displaystatus 1}
    novra_s75.tml
}
}}}

In a stand-alone configuration, in which the data will not be exported to a
remote central server, the _devicename_ and _devicenumber_
can be anything. Otherwise, to ensure a unique global name, the 
_devicename_ should be constructed in the form
_domain_._name_, for example *noaaportnet.linda*,
and the _devicenumber_ should be the number assigned by the central
server, such as 1001.

Similarly, an Nbsp server, which is assumed to be running in the same
computer where Npstats is running, is monitored by an entry such as

{{{
lappend devices(devicelist) {
    noaaportnet.diablo
    nbsp
    1002
    {export 0 csvarchive 1 displaystatus 0}
    nbsp.tml
}
}}}

where actually *noaaportnet.diablo* is the
_devicename_ that should be chosen as
explained above, and similarly with the _devicenumber_
1002 in this example.

==Alert list==

For each configured device, alerts are raised based on certain
conditions. The default alert conditions are defined in the file

        defaults/monitor.rc

and they can be modified if desired but this is not required. More important
is to define the parameters for the alert notifications, and this is done
also in the file

        site/devices.conf

that we already introduced.

By convention, the alerts can have four levels, namely info,
warn, error, crit. An alert notifications
are defined by adding entries in the file site/devices.conf,
of the form

{{{
lappend devices(alertlist) {
    _devicename_regexp_
    _level_regexp_
    _skip_
    _destination_
}
}}}

such as the following

{{{
lappend devices(alertlist) {
    noaaportnet\.
    (warn|error|crit)
    4
    smtp://nieves@ltp.edu
}
}}}
The first element is a tcl regular expression that will be matched
against the device name that raised the alert. In the above example,
the notification parameters apply to all the devices from
noaaportnet. Likewise, the second element is a regular
expression that is matched against the alert level, and thus in the
above example the three levels indicated are covered by the notification
while those with level info are ignored.

==Client configuration==

To configure a client such that it exports the data to a central server,
the files

  * site/spooler.conf
  * site/qrunner.conf

must be created.

The file site/spooler.conf must contain the line

{{{
set spooler(export_enable) 1;
}}}

It can contain any other optional settings, but nothing else is required.

The _site/qrunner.conf_ should contain the settings to specify
the upload method. For the http method the appropriate
settings should mimic the following

{{{
set qrunner(configured) "http";
set qrunner(http,sitekey) "kakameni";
set qrunner(http,url) "http://stats.noaaport.net:8025/npstats/collect";
}}}

where the _sitekey_ (kakameni) is assigned by (or set in coordination with)
the central server, and *stats.noaaport.net* would be the
central server.

==Server configuration==

The server must contain a devices.conf file that lists
all the devices that it will monitor, using the same names that the
remote (client) sites use for the devices. Then in addition the
files

        * site/npstatsd.conf
        * site/httpd.conf
        * site/monitor.conf
        * private/sitekeys.auth

must be created.

The site/npstatsd.conf file should contain the settings

{{{
set collector_manager_enable 0
set qrunner_enable 0
}}}

The first one indicates that the server is not collecting the data
itself from the device pollers, and the second one disables the
qrunner since the server will not export the data to another
server.

The _site/httpd.conf_ file should contain

{{{
set Config(collect,spooler_enable) 1;
set Config(collect,monitor_enable) 1;
}}}

which indicate that the web server should spool the data so that it is
archived, and should run the monitor in order to enable the alert
notifications.

The _site/monitor.conf_ file specifies some settings related to the notification
mechanisms. At present only smtp is supported, and that
requires the following entries in the site/monitor.conf file,

{{{
set monitor(alert,smtp,originator) "npstats@stats.noaaport.net";
set monitor(alert,smtp,servers)    "smtp.noaaport.net";
}}}

The _servers_ should be a list of smtp servers to use,
and _originator_ is the address that will appear in the header
of the message.

Finally, the server must create the file

        private/sitekeys.auth

that contains the _sitekeys_ for each site. For example

{{{
noaapornet      kakameni
wxpronet        kakameno
}}}
